feat(key-manager): add documentation for GA (#4169)
scaleway/docs-content: identity-and-access-management/key-manager/concepts.mdx

content:
  h1: Concepts
  paragraph: Explore essential cryptographic concepts, including symmetric and asymmetric encryption, data encryption keys (DEKs), key encryption keys (KEKs), and Scaleway Key Manager's robust features for secure key management and encryption operations.
tags: key-manager key encryption-key
dates:
  validation: 2025-01-06
---

## Asymmetric encryption

Asymmetric encryption is a fundamental type of cryptographic method used to secure data with a pair of keys: a **public key** and a **private key**.

The public key is used for encryption and can be shared openly, while the private key is used for decryption and must be kept secret. This design eliminates the need to share a single key securely, which is a challenge in symmetric encryption.

Asymmetric encryption is particularly well-suited for secure communication and authentication, such as encrypting emails or verifying digital signatures. However, it is slower than symmetric encryption. Algorithms like RSA and ECC are common examples of asymmetric encryption.

## Ciphertext

Ciphertext refers to data that has been encrypted using a cryptographic algorithm and a key.

> Unlike [plaintext](#plaintext), ciphertext is not human-readable and cannot be understood or used without first decrypting it with the appropriate decryption key.

Reviewer: I would like to add that ciphertext can be encrypted on client side, as long as the encryption key used to encrypt it is safely stored, for example in Key Manager

## Cryptographic operation

A cryptographic operation is any action performed using cryptography to secure data, ensure privacy, or authenticate information.

Key Manager supports the three following cryptographic operations:

- [Encryption](#encryption)
- [Decryption](#decryption)
- [Data encryption key](#data-encryption-key-dek) generation

These operations are designed to protect data from unauthorized access, ensure its integrity, and verify the identities of users or systems.

## Data encryption key (DEK)

A data encryption key is a type of key that can be used outside Key Manager to encrypt and decrypt [payloads](#payload).

Key Manager generates DEKs on-demand. They are then encrypted by a [key encryption key](#key-encryption-key-kek) specified by the user, and forwarded to the recipient.

> DEKs are **not stored in or managed by Key Manager**. The user is reponsible for safely storing and managing DEKs. DEKs should have the same lifecycle as the [payload](#payload) they encrypt**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DEKs are **not stored in or managed by Key Manager**. Users are responsible for safely storing and managing DEKs. DEKs should have the same lifecycle as the [payload](#payload) they encrypt**.
```

## Region

A Region refers to the **geographical location** in which your key will be created. **Each region contains multiple Availability Zones**. Your key will be duplicated on **all Availability Zones** of the selected region. Scaleway is available in the Paris, Amsterdam, and Warsaw regions.

## Root encryption key (REK)

A root encryption key (REK) is another type of key that has the single purpose of encrypting and decrypting KEKs in order to store them in hard storage. Scaleway's Key Manager has one REK per region, which is securely stored in our facilities.

## Symmetric encryption

Symmetric encryption is a fundamental type of cryptographic method where the same key is used to both encrypt and decrypt data. This means that the sender and receiver must have access to the same secret key, which they use to secure their communication.

Because symmetric encryption relies on a single key, it is generally fast and ideal for encrypting large volumes of data. However, its security depends entirely on keeping the key confidential.

> Symmetric encryption algorithms like AES are widely used in scenarios where speed and efficiency are critical. As of now, Key manager only supports the `AES_256_GCM` symmetric encryption algorithm.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Symmetric encryption algorithms like AES are widely used in scenarios where speed and efficiency are critical. As of now, Key Manager only supports the `AES_256_GCM` symmetric encryption algorithm.
```
